---
title: 'Snek5000: a new Python framework for Nek5000'
tags:
  - CFD
  - Python
  - Nek5000
  - FluidSim
  - Snakemake
authors:

  - name: Ashwin Vishnu Mohanan
    orcid: 0000-0002-2979-6327
    equal-contrib: true
    affiliation: 1

  - name: Arman Khoubani
    orcid: 0000-0002-0295-5308
    equal-contrib: true
    affiliation: 2

  - name: Pierre Augier
    orcid: 0000-0001-9481-4459
    equal-contrib: true
    affiliation: 2

affiliations:

  - name: Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute, Norrköping, Sweden
    index: 1

  - name: Laboratoire des Écoulements Géophysiques et Industriels, Université Grenoble Alpes,
      CNRS, Grenoble INP, 38000 Grenoble, France
    index: 2

date: 2 March 2023
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations are essential tools in various
scientific and engineering disciplines. Nek5000 is a CFD Fortran code based on
spectral element methods with a proven track record in numerous applications.
In this article, we present Snek5000, a Python package designed to streamline
the management and visualization of fluid dynamics simulations based on
Nek5000. The package builds upon the functionality of Nek5000 by providing a
user-friendly interface for launching and restarting simulations, loading
simulation data, and generating figures and movies. This paper introduces
Snek5000, discusses its design principles, and highlights its impact on the
scientific community.

# Statement of need

## State of the art

The CFD framework Nek5000 [@nek5000] is the culmination of several decades of
development.
Nek5000 solvers can produce high-fidelity simulations owing to the spectral-element
method and can scale up to several thousands of cores [@nek5000_scaling].
Development of Nek5000 is primarily driven by performance optimization,
incorporating new numerical methods whilst following a keep-it-simple approach
to ensure portability across various high-performance computing machines.

Development of Nek5000 continues to this day with efforts underway to use GPUs
[@nek5000_openacc] and to rewrite it in C++ [@nekrs] and modern Fortran
[@neko].

To the best of the authors' knowledge no other actively maintained and reusable
approaches have been made to wrap Nek5000. A project called
[`nekpy`](https://github.com/maxhutch/nekpy)
was the only known prior work resembling Snek5000, where it uses template
source files to fill in parameters.

## Better user-experience with Snek5000

Snek5000 enhances the user-experience by addressing the following downsides of
using a typical Nek5000 solver:

1. Only a limited set of utilities come packaged with Nek5000 and those focus
on compilation and mesh-generation. As a result, usability of Nek5000 takes a
hit and a practitioner is left to construct a home-brewed solution to conduct
exploratory research and parametric studies. Snek5000 functions as a workflow
manager for assisting packaging, setup, compilation and post-processing aspects
of a simulation.

2. The simulation parameters are spread across at least three different files
(`*.box`, `*.par`, and `SIZE`). Some parameters have short and cryptic names
(for example, `lx1`, `lxd`) and are dependent on each other. Snek5000
tries to provide good defaults, uses more legible parameter names when
necessary and [dynamically set some of these
parameters](https://snek5000.readthedocs.io/en/stable/_generated/snek5000.operators.html#snek5000.operators.Operators)
when possible. This allows a user to get started without the need to master the
whole manual.

# Snek5000: design principles, features and capabilities

## Powered by Python Packages

Snek5000 leverages a variety of Python packages, including Snakemake
[@snakemake], FluidSim [@fluidsim], Pymech [@pymech], Matplotlib [@matplotlib],
Jinja, Pytest, and Xarray [@xarray], to deliver a robust and user-friendly
workflow management tool for Nek5000. These packages provide a powerful
foundation for Snek5000, enabling its seamless integration with existing
Python-based workflows and enhancing its overall usability.

## A FluidSim extension

Snek5000 is based on the CFD framework FluidSim [@fluidsim], which introduces
the concept of "FluidSim solvers". A FluidSim solver consists of few files
describing a set of potential and similar simulations. A concrete simulation
can be created via a simple and generic Python API. For example, for the
`snek5000-cbox` solver,

```python
from snek5000_cbox import Simul

params = Simul.create_default_params()

# set simulation parameters
...

sim = Simul(params)
```

During the instantiation of the `Simul` object, all the directories and files
necessary to run the simulation have been created. We see that Snek5000 can be
seen as an advanced template system. Then, one can launch the Nek5000
simulation with `sim.make.exec("run_fg")`. Further details of these two stages
can be found in the Jinja templates and Snakemake rules, which are responsible for
source-code generation and execution of Nek5000 commands respectively. These
files are organized under the sub-package
[`snek5000.resources`](https://snek5000.readthedocs.io/en/stable/_generated/snek5000.resources.html)
and are both re-usable and extendable.

Since the simulations generated by a solver share some similarities (for
example, some aspects of the geometry and the equations), the solver can contain
code to create, plot and post-process output data, which is accessible through
objects contained in `sim.output`.

## Streamlined simulation management

With a Snek5000-FluidSim solver, users can efficiently launch and restart
simulations using Python scripts and a terminal command (
[`snek-restart`](https://snek5000.readthedocs.io/en/latest/how-to/restart.html)
).
Snek5000 handles all file operations, such as directory creation and file
copying. This streamlines the process of managing simulations, freeing up time
and resources for data analysis and understanding the underlying physics.

## Loading simulations for data visualization, post-processing and data analysis

It is very easy to ["load" an existing
simulation](https://snek5000.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tuto_phill_script.html#load-the-simulation),
i.e., to recreate a Python
object `sim` similar to the one used to create the simulation. This can be done
with the function `snek5000.load` or with the command `snek-ipy-load`, which
opens a IPython session with a `sim` variable. Snek5000 simplifies the process
of reading associated parameters (in `sim.params`) and data, and generating
visualizations, such as figures (`sim.output.phys_fields.plot_hexa`) and
movies (`sim.output.phys_fields.animate`). By utilizing popular Python
packages, such as Matplotlib [@matplotlib] and Xarray [@xarray], Snek5000
facilitates the creation of high-quality visualizations that can be easily
customized to meet individual needs. This powerful visualization capability
aids researchers in understanding complex fluid dynamics phenomena and
effectively presenting their findings. Beyond visualization, Snek5000 also
provides tools for post-processing and data analysis. Users can easily load
simulation data into Python for further processing, statistical analysis, and
comparison between different simulations. This streamlined approach to data
analysis enables researchers to gain valuable insights into their simulations
and focus on the underlying physical processes.

## Tutorials and documentation

Snek5000 provides comprehensive
[documentation](https://snek5000.readthedocs.io/) and tutorials to guide users
through its features and capabilities. These resources help new users quickly
become familiar with Snek5000 and enable experienced users to explore advanced
features and customization options. By providing thorough documentation,
Snek5000 promotes its widespread adoption and fosters a community of users and
developers.

Open-source solvers, such as
[snek5000-phill](https://github.com/snek5000/snek5000-phill),
[snek5000-cbox](https://github.com/snek5000/snek5000-cbox), and
[snek5000-tgv](https://github.com/snek5000/snek5000/tree/main/docs/examples/snek5000-tgv),
are available, and [users can easily develop custom
solvers](https://snek5000.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tuto_packaging.html)
tailored to their specific Nek5000 cases. This flexibility allows researchers
to adapt Snek5000 to a wide range of fluid dynamics problems and simulation
requirements. For example, Snek5000-cbox has been used for a study on linear
stability of vertical convection [@Khoubani2023vertical].

## Future developments and enhancements

The Snek5000 development team is committed to continuously improving the
package and incorporating user feedback to address evolving needs within the
scientific community.

Snek5000 has been thoughtfully designed with modularity and code reuse
principles in mind. By leveraging inheritance and object-oriented programming,
Snek5000 is well-positioned to accommodate the adoption of the next-generation
NekRS [@nekrs] code, developed by the Nek5000 team, while maintaining its
existing structure and functionality. This adaptability ensures that the
framework stays up-to-date with the latest advancements in the field. In the
future, Snek5000 can also function as a compatibility layer to migrate to
upcoming rewrites of Nek5000 which require some extra input files [@nekrs;@neko].

The design principles of Snek5000 has inspired
[FluidsimFoam](https://fluidsimfoam.readthedocs.io/), currently under
development, a promising FluidSim extension to bridge the gap between
FluidSim and OpenFOAM [@openfoam]. This extension allows users to create custom
FluidSim solvers specifically tailored for simulations on the widely-used
open-source CFD software package, OpenFOAM. By harnessing the strengths of
Python and OpenFOAM, FluidsimFoam aims to provide a versatile and user-friendly
environment for conducting computational fluid dynamics simulations, broadening
the scope of potential applications.

# Acknowledgements

The financial support of the SeRC ExABL project which made this project possible
is duly acknowledged.
The authors also acknowledge the numerical support provided by Olivier De-Marchi,
Gabriel Moreau and Cyrille Bonamy of the LEGI informatics team. This project
was funded by the project LEFE/IMAGO-2019 contract COSTRIO. AK acknowledges the
finance of his PhD thesis from the school STEP of the University Grenoble
Alpes. Part of this work was performed using resources provided under GENCI
allocation number A0120107567. A CC-BY public copyright license has been
applied by the authors to the present document and will be applied to all
subsequent versions up to the Author Accepted Manuscript arising from this
submission, in accordance with the grant's open access conditions.

# References
